CHAPTER 11 

Deploy Your Application to Production 

In part II, we built a complete real-time application using Phoenix Channels. Throughout the development process, we used many of the tools that we covered in part I. In part III, we’ll discuss the deployment and observability of real-time apps in production. We’ll first cover the current landscape of Elixir application deployment and the specific challenges that real-time applications will encounter. 

Your (or your company’s) specific needs will dictate how you deploy and run your application—there isn’t a silver bullet for all situations. Deployment techniques also change over time as new libraries, tools, and platforms emerge. This chapter is not a guide to deploying Elixir applications, and we won’t code a deployment in it. Instead, you’ll receive an overview of current deployment options before we cover more specific real-time problems: load balancing WebSockets, deployment strategies, and BEAM Node clustering options. 

Deployment can be daunting—there’s a lot of things to consider when you first set up an application. However, you’ll gain a reusable set of deployment strategies after you complete your first real-world deployment. It may be frustrating at first, but the reward of a running application is worth it. 

We’ll start this chapter with today’s lay of the land for deploying Elixir appli cations. We’ll cover topics such as Mix releases versus Distillery and what services can run your application. After that, we’ll discuss load balancing WebSockets and the challenges that happen with persistent connections during deployment. Finally, you’ll see what tools can help you cluster your production BEAM nodes together. 

Let’s start with the current landscape for deploying Elixir applications. report erratum • discuss

**The Lay of the Land**   
Chapter 11\. Deploy Your Application to Production • 222 

Deploying an app for the first time is a great feeling—it’s one of the final steps to bringing your application to users. However, it’s also daunting. There are many different techniques, platforms, and technologies to deploy with, so you’ll need to find what works for you and then implement it. Much of this may already be decided for you based on your company’s decisions, but you may be in a position of greenfield development, with many available options. 

The two common ways to run an Elixir application are directly with Mix or with releases. We’ll cover each of these options so you can decide what is best for you. Releases are produced with one of two tools—Mix or Distillery. We’ll go over each before covering some of the available platform options you can use to deploy your app. 

We’ll start with different ways to run and package your application. 

**Mix, Releases, Distillery, Oh My\!** 

You have already used one of the ways to run an application many times throughout this book. You used mix phx.server to start a local web server for the examples in this book, and you can use this command when running your application in production. This is the simplest way to get an application running in production, but you will be missing out on a few features that releases provide. If you want to go this route, *Adopting Elixir \[Tat18\]* has detailed steps on how to use mix to run your application. 

An alternative to using the mix command is to package your application into a release. There are two tools to do this in Elixir: Mix Release1 and Distillery.2 If you’re starting with a new project, then you will likely get all the features you need from Mix Release. It was designed with a similar approach to Dis tillery, and the setup is close enough to be swapped out if needed. Distillery has been around longer and has some additional features that Mix does not have, but you may not need them. 

The Elixir community has rallied around releases for deployment, so you should use releases to deploy your applications unless you have a reason not to. There are several benefits that releases provide that you do not get for free with mix phx.server or mix run. A few of the benefits are: 

1\. https://hexdocs.pm/mix/Mix.Tasks.Release.html 

2\. https://github.com/bitwalker/distillery 

report erratum • discuss

*Self-contained packages*   
The Lay of the Land • 223

Your application can be bundled with the BEAM and Erlang Run-Time System, so you do not need any special software installed on your deployment machine. You also ship compiled files as your application, instead of raw source code. 

*Management scripts* 

You get a set of scripts, for free, that allow you to do things such as con nect an interactive session to the running server, execute remote calls, and run your application as a daemon. 

*Start-up customization* 

You can easily customize how the BEAM starts up. This allows you to set flags that control how the BEAM behaves. We’ll cover a flag in the next chapter that changes how garbage collection works. 

*Code preloading* 

It’s very important that a server can quickly serve its traffic. Releases load all code at the time of start up to decrease initial latency—this is called embedded mode. If you don’t use a release, modules will be loaded the first time that they’re used. 

You get all of these benefits with both Mix Release and Distillery, so you can use either one. Some of these features, such as management scripts, are critical for operating production applications. You’ll see an example of inspecting an application via the shell in the next chapter, which is extremely useful when you debug a running application in production. We won’t cover how to set up a release in this chapter, because both tools have thorough documentation available online. 

No matter how you decide to package your application, you’ll need a place to run it. We’ll cover popular options next. 

**Platforms and Tools for Deployment** 

There are many different options for where you can run your application, and what tools you use to run it. There are dedicated Platform as a service (PaaS) products that will manage everything for you. You can also use virtual private servers if you want to manage the operating system and application yourself. Either approach will work great for Elixir applications and is largely a matter of preference and system administration experience. 

Many cloud providers support Elixir applications—most of them will work without much trouble. However, there are a few things to look out for when 

report erratum • discuss   
Chapter 11\. Deploy Your Application to Production • 224 

**~~How I Deploy Applications at Work~~**

|  |
| :---- |

At SalesLoft, we’ve been running Elixir applications roughly the same way for the past couple of years—so you could say that we’re happy with our approach. We use Kubernetesa to run all of our various applications. We use Docker to build and run each application. Our Dockerfile uses Distillery to create a release of our application, then uses Docker’s multi-stage build pipeline to create a clean Docker image contain ing just an operating system and the compiled release. 

Our applications are able to start up quickly because they are already compiled and ready to go. We also get the benefit of being able to start a remote interactive shell to any running pod—an instance of an application in Kubernetes—so we can easily troubleshoot problems that occur. 

Tools like Docker and Kubernetes are not replacements for the BEAM, or vice ver sa—they exist in a way that compliments one another. You don’t have to use these tools to deploy your applications, but you can build a solid foundation with them. 

a. https://kubernetes.io 

deploying real-time Elixir apps. It is important that the provider supports many concurrent connections to your application. WebSockets are long-lived connections, and some providers do not support a large number at the same time. The second thing to look out for is whether the provider supports BEAM clustering, which we’ll cover later in this chapter. 

There are two prominent PaaS used in the Elixir community that support these needs: Gigalixir3 and Render.4 I don’t hold a preference of one over the other and have seen good reviews from users of each. Both platforms have thorough documentation on how to deploy an Elixir application, as well as how to do tasks like configure BEAM clustering. The availability of documen tation is important when you set up your first deployment. 

Elixir applications can also be deployed to virtual private servers or bare metal servers. These options are great if you’re looking to keep monetary costs low, and if you have the experience to set up and manage this type of server. The time that you or your teammates will spend on system administration should be considered when going down this route. 

Your deployment choices are important for your application, but deployment isn’t the most important topic in this chapter. We’ll cover load balancing your WebSocket connections next. 

3\. https://gigalixir.com/ 

4\. https://render.com/ 

report erratum • discuss  
Achieve Scalability with Load Balancing • 225

**Achieve Scalability with Load Balancing** 

You should always load balance your production application with at least two servers available to serve requests, so your application can stay online when a server restarts. At its simplest, load balancing is the act of making sure that all servers receive roughly the same number of requests over a given time period. A well-balanced application will be less likely to develop hot nodes that have stressed resource usage compared to other nodes. You can also add new servers to a well-balanced application to help reduce the load on all other servers in the cluster. 

We’ll discuss the basics of load balancing before looking at how WebSockets can make achieving a well-balanced system more difficult than a traditional HTTP-powered application. 

**The Basics of Load Balancing** 

A load balancer is specialized software that acts as a proxy between a client and servers that respond to requests. Requests are sent fairly to back-end servers in round-robin, least connections, or based on the criteria that you define. Load balancers provide many benefits such as the ability to quickly add or remove back-end servers, create fair distribution of work, and increase redundancy. 

Here’s an example of a load that is not properly balanced. The top application server has received many more requests than the other servers in the application. 

Request   
Count 

Incom ing Requests   
50 15 1   
Application Instance Application Instance Application Instance 

In a well-balanced application, each server in this figure would have roughly 22 requests. A better balance allows for a more predictable usage of system resources. 

report erratum • discuss   
Chapter 11\. Deploy Your Application to Production • 226 

As with all software, there are free open-source and commercial closed-source load balancers you can use with your application. Most cloud service providers, such as Amazon Web Services, Google Cloud, and Digital Ocean, provide their 

own load balancers that work out-of-the-box. You may also opt for an open source load balancer such as HAProxy5 or nginx.6 

You will need to pick a load balancer that supports WebSockets—most now support it in some way, so that’s less of a problem than in previous years. Still, some load balancers will require running in a mode such as “TCP only” to route WebSocket requests, which causes the load balancer to not try to interpret a request or change the headers in any way. The specific WebSocket safe setup will depend on the particular load balancer that you use. 

Load balancers rely on the fact that web requests are stateless and short lived to provide an even distribution. A user can make a request to a URL and be sent to server A, and then immediately make another request and be sent to server B. The process is seamless and the user has no idea that this occurred. Load balancers get a bit trickier when persistent connections, such as WebSockets, are involved. 

**WebSockets and Load Balancers** 

In order to illustrate the challenge with persistent connections and load bal ancers, let’s run through a practical scenario. Imagine that your application has two servers. Each server has been running for some time and has 1000 active WebSocket connections each, because they’re evenly balanced. 

Your site reliability alarms are going off because your servers are stressed out, so you add a third server. This server comes online, but it has no Web Socket connections. 

5\. https://www.haproxy.org/ 

6\. https://nginx.org/en/docs/http/load\_balancing.html 

report erratum • discuss  
Achieve Scalability with Load Balancing • 227

In this case, the added capacity has no effect on the existing servers. They have persistent connections that do not reconnect unless a network failure or application restart occurs. A load balancer could add all new connections to the new server, using a least connections approach, but the existing servers would remain at high utilization until connections are closed. 

Unfortunately, there’s not an elegant solution to this problem. The added server would need to cause the other server’s clients to disconnect their WebSocket connection and connect directly to the new server. A load balancer could handle this scenario, but it would involve custom configuration and knowledge of your application. 

There are application-level solutions to this problem. One simple solution is to disconnect certain clients on the old servers so that the new server picks up the connection. This gets more difficult with many servers, because the chance of a new server being selected in the load balancing process is usually random. Here’s a figure of the three servers undergoing this type of load balance. 

The problem here is that 1000 connections were shed from the two servers, but only about 334 would make it to the new server. This means that the process would need to be repeated until it becomes balanced. In addition, there are 1000 disconnected clients at point B in the process. Ideally the clients reconnect very quickly, but this is a place where bugs are likely to appear. 

Another option is to shed connections from an application server only when a critical resource (like CPU or memory) has been out of an acceptable range for a period of time. In this case, the two servers may shed load based on the alarm criteria but would quickly reach a healthy state. 

One last, very simple, approach to load balancing is to disconnect WebSocket connections after a period of time. This would cause your system to be unbalanced only for brief durations. There are trade-offs to everything, though. 

report erratum • discuss   
Chapter 11\. Deploy Your Application to Production • 228 

This approach would not balance the system very quickly, and clients would be reconnected throughout their time on the application. 

You may not see load-balance issues as a problem until a certain scale or threshold is reached. Always load balance your production applications with at least two servers, but solve the problem of unbalanced servers only when you start dynamically changing the number of servers that back your appli cation. You can use the techniques discussed in this section to perform load balancing, or you may think of creative ways based on your specific use case. 

Next, we’ll look at a few different ways to perform a deployment. 

**Push New Code Safely** 

The initial deployment of your application is only the first hurdle to overcome. Your code will evolve and needs to be redeployed over time. This presents its own set of challenges, because you want your application updates to be invisible to users. Some teams may solve this by only deploying off-hours, but we’ll look at strategies that allow you to deploy your code at any time. 

We’ll discuss two different strategies for doing deployments. The first type that we’ll cover is rolling deployment. We’ll then look at an alternative called blue-green deployment. You’ll see how the deploy method you choose can influence your load balance and uptime. Before we get into the types of deploys, let’s look at the impact that deployment will have on your application. 

**The Reality of Deployment** 

We need to start with an important disclaimer about deployments—your servers will restart and any active connections will disconnect. Clients may remain disconnected for a few seconds, unable to receive new messages from your application. 

Connections will quickly reconnect, but any data that was in-memory, such as in processes or ETS tables, will be gone. You can design applications that are resilient to restarting by ensuring that all data is kept in a less ephemeral place, such as on the front end or in a database. 

Elixir supports hot code reloading—this allows you to change the code while the system is still running. However, it’s something that you should use very sparingly, if at all. There is a lot of complexity involved in making sure that your data structures and GenServers are able to migrate while remaining online. This complexity puts you in a situation where an erroneous deployment forces you to restart all servers, which may be a problem if it’s not something you do often. 

report erratum • discuss  
Push New Code Safely • 229

With that out of the way, let’s look at a basic deployment tactic—rolling deployments. 

**Rolling Deployments** 

Rolling deployments work very well for many applications. A server comes offline and then one comes online (or vice versa) so the application remains stable throughout. This works for short-lived requests, but a problem occurs when we do rolling deployments with WebSockets. The first server that restarts will receive a majority of the traffic after the deployment is finished. Here’s a figure demonstrating how this happens. 

When a server goes offline, all of its connected clients immediately try to reconnect. The server is still restarting, so it is not yet available to handle requests. This causes all of the new connections to be balanced to the existing servers. This continues for each server in the cluster until the end state is reached. Throughout the process, some servers will receive a spike in connec tions before being restarted. 

This problem is less severe in applications where clients reconnect often, because the connections will balance over a short period of time. Your appli cations may work great even with the spread in WebSocket connections that rolling deployments can cause. Also, your load balancer may support the least connections balance mode, which would help alleviate the issue during rolling deployments. Alternatively, you could implement an application-level load balancing scheme—like you saw in the previous section—or you could change to a different model of deployment. 

We’ll cover an alternative to rolling deployments, blue-green deployments, next. 

**Blue-Green Deployments** 

A rolling deployment is one of the simplest ways to deploy an application. This type of deployment will probably work well for you, but there are other 

report erratum • discuss   
Chapter 11\. Deploy Your Application to Production • 230 

options as well. A more advanced type of deployment is called blue-green. In this strategy, your application cluster remains online while a second cluster is deployed. Once the second cluster is healthy and ready to serve traffic, the load balancer cuts over to it. This can happen either immediately or slowly over time. The following figure shows how this works: 

Load Balancer 

1\. Old cluster receiving requests 

2\. New cluster   
becom es available   
Instance Instance 

Instance Instance 

Once the new cluster is available, the load balancer switches which cluster it connects to: 

4\. Old cluster   
rem oved when 

Load Balancer 3\. New cluster receiving requests 

Instance Instance 

Instance Instance   
stable 

This approach causes all existing connections to disconnect and reconnect. They will connect in a balanced fashion, but they could all connect at roughly the same time, depending on how the existing connections are closed. 

report erratum • discuss  
Cluster Your BEAM Nodes Together • 231

This is the opposite of rolling deployments, where the connections will establish throughout the time that it takes to deploy but will end in an unbalanced state. 

The approach you take largely depends on your application’s and users’ needs. Both deployment strategies are established ways of deploying code and are used successfully by companies in the Elixir community. There is a lot of nuance in how these deployments can be set up—you may be able to avoid certain problems by crafting your deployments carefully. 

An important aspect of Elixir application deployment is node clustering. Next, we’ll discuss clustering your BEAM nodes in production, and why this is critical for real-time applications. 

**Cluster Your BEAM Nodes Together** 

You must connect your BEAM nodes together when deploying a real-time application to production. We covered in previous chapters that a WebSocket based application broadcasts outbound messages to all nodes in the cluster, using PubSub, so that connections on other nodes receive the message for connections that they own. If your nodes can not talk to each other, some messages will be missed and not sent to clients. 

There are two ways to implement clustering in your application. The first way, that comes out-of-the-box with OTP, is to connect nodes together with dis tributed Erlang. This creates a direct peer-to-peer connection between all nodes in the cluster. However, some deployment environments may not be able to network nodes this way due to connectivity restrictions. In these cases, it’s possible to use Redis as an alternative to clustering. 

We’ll cover libraries that help you with clustering, and we’ll cover what to do if native clustering isn’t available to you. 

**Ready Your Application for Clustering** 

One of my favorite things about Elixir/Erlang is that it comes with support for node-to-node connectivity out-of-the-box. In addition to being provided as a standard in the language, it works really well. 

The :net\_kernel.connect\_node/1 function connects the node that invoked it to a specified remote node. Once the TCP connection is established, the connection is kept fresh with a heartbeat and will automatically become disconnected if the nodes can no longer talk to each other. This comes out-of-the-box, but there are a few things that you must set up in order to use it. 

report erratum • discuss   
Chapter 11\. Deploy Your Application to Production • 232 

The first requirement of connecting nodes together is to have a way for your 

BEAM nodes to talk over a given port and IP. You can hard-code the port that BEAM uses for distribution, or you can have the Erlang Port Mapper Daemon7 running and available between the remote nodes. epmd maps symbolic node names to machine addresses, so your application can use an atom like :my\_app@my\_host and be mapped to the right port and IP address. epmd should never be exposed to the public internet, only between the nodes in the cluster. This isolation is possible to set up using a virtual private cloud. 

The second requirement is a shared cookie between all nodes in the cluster. The cookie is an atom that is compared between two nodes when they try to connect to each other. If the cookie doesn’t match, the connection is not allowed. Tools like Mix Release and Distillery will automatically set this up for you, although you can change it to be longer or a different value. 

*Adopting Elixir \[Tat18\]* goes into more detail on how to configure distributed Erlang, epmd, SSL, and cookies. Many of these things are handled for you automatically if you deploy your application using a release. 

Let’s look at what libraries are used for clustering next. 

**Libraries for Clustering** 

Elixir makes it very easy to cluster two nodes together. Earlier in the book, you ran the code Node.connect(:"server@127.0.0.1") to connect two local nodes to each other. A bigger challenge is identifying which nodes need to be connected to each other and where they’re located. Discovery is an easy task locally, because you know exactly where the node is running and you know the node’s name. In production, however, your nodes will be separated across physical servers and IP addresses. They may even be in completely different data centers. 

There are two libraries that solve the problem of node discovery very well. Peerage8 and libcluster9 both provide a few different ways to perform node dis covery. The simplest approach you can take is to hard-code your node names in a configuration. You can utilize more powerful features like DNS-based dis covery, Kubernetes API discovery, or even write your own strategy for discovery. 

libcluster is a powerful tool to have at your disposal, but you may not be able to set up distributed Erlang due to networking restrictions. Next, we’ll cover an alternative way of communicating using Redis-based PubSub. 

7\. https://erlang.org/doc/man/epmd.html 

8\. https://github.com/mrluc/peerage 

9\. https://github.com/bitwalker/libcluster 

report erratum • discuss  
Advanced Phoenix Channel Configuration • 233

**Redis-based PubSub—A Clustering Alternative** 

You may be in a situation where distributed Erlang is simply not possible. Some cloud providers lock down their networking, or maybe a corporate policy prevents it. Phoenix Channels are built on top of Phoenix PubSub, which abstracts 

away the actual communication in a way that can be swapped out. One of the libraries that is available to use with Phoenix PubSub is phoenix\_pubsub\_redis.10 

With phoenix\_pubsub\_redis, all messages are sent through Redis’s native PubSub commands. Your application subscribes to specific topics that allow the application to listen to events from other servers. This is a powerful library to have in your back pocket, just in case you find yourself in this situation. It’s straightforward to set up by following the Phoenix.PubSub.Redis documenta tion,11 so we won’t set it up in this chapter. 

One caveat of using the Redis PubSub adapter is that all messages will be sent through a single Redis server. This can cause spikes in utilized network bandwidth if your application sends many messages at once—each server receives a copy of the message, just like in distributed Erlang. This is not going to be an issue for most applications, but you should monitor your Redis server’s statistics if you go down this path. 

Redis-based PubSub is not a complete alternative to distributed Erlang. An application that uses it will not be able to use native distribution functions, and you will not have a direct connection to any other node. However, Phoenix Channels will work out-of-the-box with Redis-based PubSub, and many other features that you may need can be implemented with it. 

Next, we’ll look at different configuration options that you’ll need to set when you deploy a Phoenix application. 

**Advanced Phoenix Channel Configuration** 

You will need to make a few small changes to your Phoenix application con figuration when you deploy to production, although most things will work out-of-the-box. Phoenix provides a guide12 on how to deploy with releases. This guide helps you configure your application secrets, runtime configuration, and asset bundling. 

There is one configuration that is specific for Channel-based applications—ori gin checking. Let’s look at that now. 

10\. https://hex.pm/packages/phoenix\_pubsub\_redis 

11\. https://hexdocs.pm/phoenix\_pubsub\_redis/Phoenix.PubSub.Redis.html 

12\. https://hexdocs.pm/phoenix/releases.html 

report erratum • discuss   
Chapter 11\. Deploy Your Application to Production • 234 

**Origin Checking** 

Origin checking is a security measure to restrict which websites can connect to your application. By default, incoming connections to a Channel transport inspect the Origin HTTP header and ensure that it matches an allowed list. The only allowed origin, by default, is the host config that is set in your appli cation config. For example, the following config only allows connections that originate from the origin "app.sneakers23.com". 

config *:sneakers\_23*, Sneakers23Web.Endpoint, 

*url:* \[*host: "app.sneakers23.com"*, *port:* 80\] 

You should set the host field for your application, so that connections will work when you deploy your application to production. If you are deploying an application that serves connections from multiple hosts, or from clients like browser extensions, you can change which origins are allowed. You can configure your Socket to use a list of origins, a custom origin-checking func tion, or disable it completely by setting the check\_origin option to false. 

It’s easy to change the check\_origin configuration for all Sockets in your applica tion, like so: 

config *:sneakers\_23*, Sneakers23Web.Endpoint, 

*check\_origin:* \[ 

*"//app.sneakers23.com"*, 

*"chrome://extension-id"*, 

*"https://sneakers23.com"* 

\] 

Alternatively, you can set the check\_origin configuration on a per-socket basis in the Endpoint definition. This is done by passing check\_origin as an argument to socket/3. 

socket *"/socket"*, MyStoreWeb.ProductSocket, 

*websocket:* \[ 

*check\_origin:* {MyStoreWeb.Origin, *:allowed?*, \[\]} 

\] 

This configuration will invoke MyStoreWeb.Origin.allowed?(uri) to check the URI’s origin. The specified function should return true or false depending on whether the origin is allowed. Any of the available formats can be used in either con figuration. 

Other configuration options are available for Phoenix Sockets. Let’s look at these other options. 

report erratum • discuss  
Wrapping Up • 235

**Other Configuration Options** 

There is documentation13 available that lists all the options you can use to configure Phoenix Sockets and Channels. We won’t cover all the available options in detail, because many applications will not need to use them. However, it’s important you know that additional options exist and know where to find more information about them. 

We’ve already covered the check\_origin option, which is one of the more common options to change. The connect\_info option is also useful for some applications. This allows your Phoenix.Socket.connect/3 callback to receive additional information that you can use to decide if a connection should be allowed. Of note, you can configure your Socket to receive additional headers or even the user’s session information. (You must include a CSRF token in the connection request to get session information, due to WebSocket security.) 

Other options are available to change how a WebSocket behaves. You can compress WebSocket frames by setting the compress: true option when you call socket/3 in your Endpoint. This option decreases the size of data payloads but comes at the cost of additional CPU on the server and client. You can also configure the maximum size of each WebSocket frame, which is useful if you have dynamic payloads coming from clients. You may not need to use these options for your application, but it’s good to know they’re available if needed. 

**Wrapping Up** 

There are many different ways to deploy an Elixir application. You can customize the deployment process to you or your company’s specific needs and still be successful. One constant in the deployment process is that code needs to be packaged and executed. You can start simple with mix commands to run your application, but you get more features by using releases. Releases now come out-of-the-box with Elixir 1.9 and are widely accepted in the community. 

Production applications should use multiple servers to handle requests. This increases redundancy and allows for additional scalability when needed. A load balancer is used to ensure that multiple back-end servers receive a fair number of requests. WebSockets cause problems with load balancers because WebSocket connections stay open for long periods of time, so they do not readily become balanced. You can solve this problem both at the application level by reconnecting active WebSockets, or at the load-balancer level. 

13\. https://hexdocs.pm/phoenix/Phoenix.Endpoint.html\#socket/2 

report erratum • discuss   
Chapter 11\. Deploy Your Application to Production • 236 

There are two primary ways to restart servers with new code. The first, and most simple, approach is to do a rolling deploy. This causes nodes to go offline and come back online before continuing with more nodes—the maximum number of disconnected nodes is capped out. Rolling deploys can cause an imbalance of WebSocket connections during the deployment process. An alternative that can help reduce this problem is blue-green deployment. Hot code deployment is also possible on the BEAM, but it is not recommended for most applications. 

Nodes in a production cluster must be able to communicate with each other. Erlang/OTP ships with distribution mechanisms out-of-the-box, and it’s usually as simple as configuring a library to enable node-to-node communi cation. Sometimes this isn’t available though, for reasons outside of your control. In these situations, Redis PubSub can be used to communicate between nodes. 

We covered the aspects of deploying a real-time Elixir application, but the actual runtime execution of an application is just as important. In the next chapter, we’ll look at how to manage different system resources like CPU and memory. We’ll also look at tools that can help diagnose performance problems in deployed real-time applications. 
